~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

                              THE ORIGIN OF 
               THE FAMILY, PRIVATE PROPERTY, AND THE STATE

                                   by
                            FREDERICK ENGELS

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~


                                   I.

                      STAGES OF PREHISTORIC CULTURE


MORGAN is the first man who, with expert knowledge, has attempted to
introduce a definite order into the history of primitive man; so long
as no important additional material makes changes necessary, his
classification will undoubtedly remain in force.

Of the three main epochs -- savagery, barbarism, and civilization -- he
is concerned, of course, only with the first two and the transition to
the third.  He divides both savagery and barbarism into lower, middle,
and upper stages according to the progress made in the production of
food; for, he says:

     Upon their skill in this direction, the whole question of human
     supremacy on the earth depended.  Mankind are the only beings who
     may be said to have gained an absolute control over the
     production of food.... It is accordingly probable that the great
     epochs of human progress have been identified, more or less
     directly, with the enlargement of the sources of subsistence.
     [Morgan, op. cit., p. 19. -Ed.]

The development of the family takes a parallel course, but here the
periods have not such striking marks of differentiation.


                             I. SAVAGERY


(a.)  LOWER STAGE.  Childhood of the human race.  Man still lived in
his original habitat, in tropical or subtropical forests, and was
partially at least a tree-dweller, for otherwise his survival among
huge beasts of prey cannot be explained.  Fruit, nuts and roots served
him for food.  The development of articulate speech is the main result
of this period.  Of all the peoples known to history none was still at
this primitive level.  Though this period may have lasted thousands of
years, we have no direct evidence to prove its existence; but once the
evolution of man from the animal kingdom is admitted, such a
transitional stage must necessarily be assumed.

(b.)  MIDDLE STAGE.  Begins with the utilization of fish for food
(including crabs, mussels, and other aquatic animals), and with the use
of fire.  The two are complementary, since fish becomes edible only by
the use of fire.  With this new source of nourishment, men now became
independent of climate and locality; even as savages, they could, by
following the rivers and coasts, spread over most of the earth.  Proof
of these migrations is the distribution over every continent of the
crudely worked, unsharpened flint tools of the earlier Stone Age, known
as "palaeoliths," all or most of which date from this period.  New
environments, ceaseless exercise of his inventive faculty, and the
ability to produce fire by friction, led man to discover new kinds of
food: farinaceous roots and tubers, for instance, were baked in hot
ashes or in ground ovens.  With the invention of the first weapons,
club and spear, game could sometimes he added to the fare.  But the
tribes which figure in books as living entirely, that is, exclusively,
by hunting never existed in reality; the yield of the hunt was far too
precarious.  At this stage, owing to the continual uncertainty of food
supplies, cannibalism seems to have arisen, and was practiced from now
onwards for a long time.  The Australian aborigines and many of the
Polynesians are still in this middle stage of savagery today.

(c.)  UPPER STAGE.  Begins with the invention of the bow and arrow,
whereby  game became a regular source of food, and bunting a normal
form of  work.  Bow, string, and arrow already constitute a very
complex instrument, whose invention implies long, accumulated
experience and sharpened intelligence, and therefore knowledge of many
other inventions as well.  We find, in fact, that the peoples
acquainted with the bow and arrow but not yet with pottery (from which
Morgan dates the transition to barbarism) are already making some
beginnings towards settlement in villages and have gained some control
over the production of means of subsistence; we find wooden vessels and
utensils, finger-weaving (without looms) with filaments of bark;
plaited baskets of bast or osier; sharpened (neolithic) stone tools. 
With the discovery of fire and the stone ax, dug-out canoes now become
common; beams and planks arc also sometimes used for building houses. 
We find all these advances, for instance, among the Indians of
northwest America, who are acquainted with the bow and arrow but not
with pottery.  The bow and arrow was for savagery what the iron sword
was for barbarism and fire-arms for civilization -- the decisive
weapon.


                             2. BARBARISM


(a.)  LOWER STAGE.  Dates from the introduction of pottery.  In many
cases it has been proved, and in all it is probable, that the first
pots originated from the habit of covering baskets or wooden vessels
with clay to make them fireproof; in this way it was soon
discovered that the clay mold answered the purpose without any inner
vessel.

Thus far we have been able to follow a general line of development
applicable to all peoples at a given period without distinction of
place.  With the beginning of barbarism, however, we have reached a
stage when the difference in the natural endowments of the two
hemispheres of the earth comes into play.  The characteristic feature
of the period of barbarism is the domestication and breeding of animals
and the cultivation of plants.  Now, the Eastern Hemisphere, the
so-called Old World, possessed nearly all the animals adaptable to
domestication, and all the varieties of cultivable cereals except one;
the Western Hemisphere, America, had no mammals that could be
domesticated except the llama, which, moreover, was only found in one
part of South America, and of all the cultivable cereals only one,
though that was the best, namely, maize.  Owing to these differences in
natural conditions, the population of each hemisphere now goes on its
own way, and different landmarks divide the particular stages in each
of the two cases.

(b.)  MIDDLE STAGE.  Begins in the Eastern Hemisphere with
domestication of animals; in the Western, with the cultivation, by
means of irrigation, of plants f or food, and with the use of adobe
(sun-dried) bricks and stone f or building.

We will begin with the Western Hemisphere, as here this stage was never
superseded before the European conquest.

At the time when they were discovered, the Indians at the lower stage
of barbarism (comprising all the tribes living east of the Mississippi)
were already practicing some horticulture of maize, and possibly also
of gourds, melons, and other garden plants, from which they obtained a
very considerable part of their food.  They lived in wooden houses in
villages protected by palisades.  The tribes in the northwest,
particularly those in the region of the Columbia River, were still at
the upper stage of savagery and acquainted neither with pottery nor
with any form of horticulture.  The so-called Pueblo Indians of New
Mexico, however, and the Mexicans, Central Americans, and Peruvians at
the time of their conquest were at the middle stage of barbarism.  They
lived in houses like fortresses, made of adobe brick or of stone, and
cultivated maize and other plants, varying according to locality and
climate, in artificially irrigated plots of ground, which supplied
their main source of food; some animals even had also been domesticated
-- the turkey and other birds by the Mexicans, the llama by the
Peruvians.  They could also work metals, but not iron; hence they were
still unable to dispense with stone weapons and tools.  The Spanish
conquest then cut short any further independent development.

In the Eastern Hemisphere the middle stage of barbarism began with the
domestication of animals providing milk and meat, but horticulture
seems to have remained unknown far into this period.  It was,
apparently, the domestication and breeding of animals and the formation
of herds of considerable size that led to the differentiation of the
Aryans and Semites from the mass of barbarians.  The European and
Asiatic Aryans still have the same names for cattle, but those f or
most of the cultivated plants are already different.

In suitable localities, the keeping of herds led to a pastoral life:
the Semites lived upon the grassy plains of the Euphrates and Tigris,
and the Aryans upon those of India and of the Oxus and Jaxartes, of the
Don and the Dnieper.  It must have been on the borders of such pasture
lands that animals were first domesticated.  To later generations,
consequently, the pastoral tribes appear to have come from regions
which, so far from being the cradle of mankind, were almost
uninhabitable for their savage ancestors and even for man at the lower
stages of barbarism.  But having once accustomed themselves to pastoral
life in the grassy plains of the rivers, these barbarians of the middle
period would never have dreamed of returning willingly to the native
forests of their ancestors.  Even when they were forced further to the
north and west, the Semites and Aryans could not move into the forest
regions of western Asia and of Europe until by cultivation of grain
they had made it possible to pasture and especially to winter their
herds on this less favorable land.  It is more than probable that among
these tribes the cultivation of grain originated from the need for
cattle fodder and only later became important as a human food supply.

The plentiful supply of milk and meat and especially the beneficial
effect of these foods on the growth of the children account perhaps for
the superior development of the Aryan and Semitic races.  It is a fact
22 that the Pueblo Indians of New Mexico, who are reduced to an almost
entirely vegetarian diet, have a smaller brain than the Indians at the
lower stage of barbarism, who eat more meat and fish.  In any case,
cannibalism now gradually dies out, surviving only as a religious act
or as a means of working magic, which is here almost the same thing.

(c.)  UPPER STAGE.  Begins with the smelting of iron ore, and passes
into civilization with the invention of alphabetic writing and its use
for literary records.  This stage (as we have seen, only the Eastern
Hemisphere passed through it independently) is richer in advances in
production than all the preceding stages together.  To it belong the
Greeks of the heroic age, the tribes of Italy shortly before the
foundation of Rome, the Germans of Tacitus and the Norsemen of the
Viking age.

Above all, we now first meet the iron plowshare drawn by cattle, which
made large-scale agriculture, the cultivation of fields, possible, and
thus created a practically unrestricted food supply in comparison with
previous conditions.  This led to the clearance of forest land for
tillage and pasture, which in turn was impossible on a large scale
without the iron ax and the iron spade.  Population rapidly increased
in number, and in small areas became dense.  Prior to field
agriculture, conditions must have been very exceptional if they allowed
half a million people to be united under a central organization;
probably such a thing never occurred.

We find the upper stage of barbarism at its highest in the Homeric
poems, particularly in the Iliad.  Fully developed iron tools, the
bellows, the hand-mill, the potter's wheel, the making of oil and wine,
metal work developing almost into a fine art, the wagon and the
war-chariot, ship-building with beams and planks, the beginnings of
architecture as art, walled cities with towers and battlements, the
Homeric epic and a complete mythology -- these are the chief legacy
brought by the Greeks from barbarism into civilization.  When we
compare the descriptions which Caesar and even Tacitus give of the
Germans, who stood at the beginning of the cultural stage from which
the Homeric Greeks were just preparing to make the next advance, we
realize how rich was the development of production within the upper
stage of barbarism.

The sketch which I have given here, following Morgan, of the
development of mankind through savagery and barbarism to the beginnings
of civilization, is already rich enough in new features; what is more,
they cannot be disputed, since they are drawn directly from the process
of production.  Yet my sketch will seem flat and feeble compared with
the picture to be unrolled at the end of our travels; only then will
the transition from barbarism to civilization stand out in full light
and in all its striking contrasts.  For the time being, Morgan's
division may be summarized thus: 

    Savagery -- the period in which man's appropriation of products in
    their natural state predominates; the products of human art are
    chiefly instruments which assist this appropriation.  

    Barbarism -- the period during which man learns to breed domestic
    animals and to practice agriculture, and acquires methods of
    increasing the supply of natural products by human activity. 

    Civilization -- the period in which man learns a more advanced
    application of work to the products of nature, the period of
    industry proper and of art.


~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
                                  